README.md, before:

# GNN-on-Storage

Prerequisites: python>=3.8, python modules: `torch, torchmetrics, torch_geometric, torch_sparse, tqdm, json5, pyinstrument, ogb`

## Commands to limit memory resources

```
sudo bash scripts/set_memory_limit.sh <xxxG> <username> # create a group named "memory:gnnxxxG"

cgexec -g memory:gnnxxxG <your-executable> # run executable within the memory budget
```

## Performance notes

Python is generally faster than what you might think (more like ~10x slower instead of 100x slower than C/C++ when running simple loops).
However, there are some cases where you should avoid doing it in Python, and would otherwise cause the ~100x slowdown.

One example is handling millions of items with Python built-in data structures, e.g. `tuple, list, set`:

```python
logger.info(f"Gathering edge parts: {edge_intervals.size(1)}")
edge_parts =  list(zip(
    ranges_gather(src, edge_intervals[0], edge_part_sizes),
    ranges_gather(dst, edge_intervals[0], edge_part_sizes)
)) # slow
edge_parts = [
    (src[start : end], dst[start : end]) for start, end in edge_intervals.t().tolist()
] # slow
logger.info("Gathering completes")
```

Torch datapipes are composable and promising, yet it failed. One reason I suspect the cause of failure: it's really SLOW.

It's slow due to the excessive decorating code. The core concept of torchdata is simple: datapipe graphs with each stage expressed as a python iterator. Note that iterating over a minimal iterator in python is in no case slow: for example, traversing a million-item list takes only 5\~10 ns per iteration. Adopting the generator pattern brings flexibility in implementing datapipe stages but at a cost, generally leading to a 5\~10x slowdown. Yet, up till now, we can still tolerate it somehow.

It's the additional things that pytorch does that makes things intolerable. PyTorch datapipes by default has a lot of decorative code revolving around the core `send`/`yield` loop, which make things **~100x slower**. This overhead applies to all datapipe stages, which really sinks the datapipe performance at runtime.

Commit message:

remove deps on torch dataloader to reduce memory by 2x

README.md, after:

# GNN-on-Storage

Prerequisites: python>=3.8, python modules:
`torch, torchmetrics, torch_geometric, torch_sparse, tqdm, json5, psutils, ogb`

## Commands to limit memory resources

```
sudo bash scripts/set_memory_limit.sh <xxxG> <username> # create a group named "memory:gnnxxxG"

cgexec -g memory:gnnxxxG <your-executable> # run executable within the memory budget
```

## Performance notes

Python is generally faster than what you might think (more like ~10x slower instead of 100x slower than C/C++ when running simple loops).
However, there are some cases where you should avoid doing it in Python, and would otherwise cause the ~100x slowdown.

One example is handling millions of items with Python built-in data structures, e.g. `tuple, list, set`:

```python
logger.info(f"Gathering edge parts: {edge_intervals.size(1)}")
edge_parts =  list(zip(
    ranges_gather(src, edge_intervals[0], edge_part_sizes),
    ranges_gather(dst, edge_intervals[0], edge_part_sizes)
)) # slow
edge_parts = [
    (src[start : end], dst[start : end]) for start, end in edge_intervals.t().tolist()
] # slow
logger.info("Gathering completes")
```

Torch datapipes are composable and promising, yet it failed. I suspect the causes of failure are two-fold: performance and memory overhead.

It's slow due to the excessive decorating code. The core concept of torchdata is simple: datapipe graphs with each stage expressed as a python iterator. Iterating over a minimal iterator in python is in no case slow: for example, traversing a million-item list takes only 5\~10 ns per iteration. Adopting the generator pattern brings flexibility in implementing datapipe stages but at a cost, generally leading to a 5\~10x slowdown. Yet, up till now, we can still tolerate it somehow.

It's the additional things that pytorch does that makes things intolerable. PyTorch datapipes by default has a lot of decorative code revolving around the core `send`/`yield` loop, which make things **~100x slower**. This overhead applies to all datapipe stages, which really sinks the datapipe performance at runtime.

Another issue with datapipe is memory overhead. The default serialization method provided in torch would serialize the tensors, numpy arrays, etc. into actual bytes that holds the data. The serialization is performed each time the datapipe-backed dataloader is initialized (per epoch). It leads to memory peaks that are much higher than expected. The generator pattern also inflate the memory usage if not carefully coded. A common pattern in the datapipe code is, some data is yielded from a former pipeline, and then some processing is done before yielding it again:

```python
class SomePipe:
    ...
    def __iter__(self):
        for data in self.former_dp:
            new_data = ... #
            yield new_data
    ...
```

The datapipe thus holds a reference to the `data` object until it's superseded in the next iteration, which delays the reclaimation of the memory and increase the peak memory by 2x in the worse case.
